skills/cookbooks/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: cookbooks
description: Use this skill when the user wants to build AI applications with Weaviate. It contains a high-level index of architectural patterns, 'one-shot' blueprints, and best practices for common use cases.
---

# Weaviate Cookbooks

## Overview

This skill provides an index of implementation guides and foundational requirements for building Weaviate-powered AI applications. Use the references to quickly scaffold full-stack applications with best practices for connection management, environment setup, and application architecture.

## Environment Requirements

Before generating backend code that initializes a Weaviate client:

1. Read [Environment Requirements](references/environment-requirements.md) for the canonical env var and header mapping.
2. Use provider-specific env var names only (for example, `OPENAI_API_KEY`).
3. Do not introduce generic placeholders like `INFERENCE_API_KEY` or `EXTERNAL_PROVIDER_API_KEY`.

## Cookbook Index

- [Query Agent Chatbot](references/query-agent-chatbot.md): Build a full-stack Next.js + FastAPI chatbot using Weaviate Query Agent with streaming and chat history support.
- [Data Explorer](references/data_explorer.md): Build a full-stack Next.js + FastAPI data explorer app including sorting, keyword search and tabular view of weaviate data.
- [Multimodal RAG: Building Document Search](references/multimodal_rag.md): Build a multimodal Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) system using Weaviate, ColQwen2 for embeddings and Qwen2.5-VL for generation.

## Interface (Optional)

Use this when the user explicitly asks for a frontend for their Weaviate backend.

- [Frontend Interface](references/frontend_interface.md): Build a Next.js frontend to interact with the Weaviate backend.

Commit message:

Update AGENTS.md, SKILL.md, and skills/cookbooks/SKILL.md to include instructions for creating a Weaviate Cloud instance. Enhance environment variable sections and improve clarity in available scripts. Ensure consistency across documentation for better user guidance.

skills/cookbooks/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: cookbooks
description: Use this skill when the user wants to build AI applications with Weaviate. It contains a high-level index of architectural patterns, 'one-shot' blueprints, and best practices for common use cases.
---

# Weaviate Cookbooks

## Overview

This skill provides an index of implementation guides and foundational requirements for building Weaviate-powered AI applications. Use the references to quickly scaffold full-stack applications with best practices for connection management, environment setup, and application architecture.

### Weaviate Cloud Instance

If the user does not have an instance yet, direct them to the cloud console to register and create a free sandbox. Create a Weaviate instance via [Weaviate Cloud](https://console.weaviate.cloud/).

## Environment Requirements

Before generating backend code that initializes a Weaviate client:

1. Read [Environment Requirements](references/environment-requirements.md) for the canonical env var and header mapping.
2. Use provider-specific env var names only (for example, `OPENAI_API_KEY`).
3. Do not introduce generic placeholders like `INFERENCE_API_KEY` or `EXTERNAL_PROVIDER_API_KEY`.

## Cookbook Index

- [Query Agent Chatbot](references/query-agent-chatbot.md): Build a full-stack Next.js + FastAPI chatbot using Weaviate Query Agent with streaming and chat history support.
- [Data Explorer](references/data_explorer.md): Build a full-stack Next.js + FastAPI data explorer app including sorting, keyword search and tabular view of weaviate data.
- [Multimodal RAG: Building Document Search](references/multimodal_rag.md): Build a multimodal Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) system using Weaviate, ColQwen2 for embeddings and Qwen2.5-VL for generation.

## Interface (Optional)

Use this when the user explicitly asks for a frontend for their Weaviate backend.

- [Frontend Interface](references/frontend_interface.md): Build a Next.js frontend to interact with the Weaviate backend.
